docs: add documentation for kargo-specific annotations and labels (#3998)
akuity/kargo: docs/docs/50-user-guide/60-reference-docs/70-annotations.md

---
sidebar_label: Annotations
description: List of Kargo-specific annotations and labels
---

# Annotations and Labels used by Kargo

This page documents certain annotations and labels that are applicable to
Kargo resource types and other Kubernetes resource types (e.g. `Secret`s or
`ServiceAccounts`) and affect how Kargo handles those resources. The subset
documented here are those that the maintainers have judged most likely to be of
use to advanced users who may, for instance, be looking to interact
programmatically with Kargo.

## Annotations

> | Key | Target Resource(s) | Possible Values | Description |

Reviewer: Let's alphabetize the entries in the table by key.

|-----|--------------------|-----------------|-------------|
| `kargo.akuity.io/refresh` | `Warehouse`, `Stage`, `Promotion` | A string that is unique or at least unlikely to repeat, such as a UUID or a timestamp of "now" | Triggers reconciliation of the resource when its value changes. |

> | `kargo.akuity.io/reverify` | `Stage` | Verification ID or JSON object (VerificationRequest) | Triggers re-verification of the current `Freight`. |

Reviewer: Still need to know where to find a verification ID and how the JSON object is structured.

If it makes more sense to not mention the JSON option, that would probably be ok too.

| `kargo.akuity.io/abort` | `Stage` | Verification ID | Aborts an in-progress `Freight` verification. |

> | `kargo.akuity.io/description` | Any | Any string | Human-readable description displayed in the UI. |

Reviewer: I still don't think this is truly applicable to any resource type.

| `kargo.akuity.io/color` | `Stage` | Hex color code (e.g. `#ff8800`) | Optional cosmetic color used in the UI's pipeline view. |
| `kargo.akuity.io/authorized-stage` | `Argo CD Application` | `<project>:<stage>` | Indicates which `Stage` is authorized to manage the `Application` resource. |
| `rbac.kargo.akuity.io/managed` | `ServiceAccount`, `Role`, `RoleBinding` | `"true"` |  Permits the UI or CLI (via the API server) to programmatically manage trios of `ServiceAccount`, `Role`, and `RoleBinding` resources via Kargo's own ["roles" abstraction](../50-security/20-access-controls/index.md#managing-mappings-and-permissions). Omit this annotation if you wish to exclusively manage these resources [declaratively](../50-security/20-access-controls/index.md#managing-kargo-roles-declaratively). |

> | `rbac.kargo.akuity.io/claim.<name>` | `ServiceAccount` | Claim name as suffix | Maps an OIDC claim (e.g., `sub`, `email`, or `groups`) to a `ServiceAccount`, enabling user-to-ServiceAccount mappings. For more details, refer to the access control sections of the [Operator Guide](../../40-operator-guide/40-security/30-access-controls.md) and [User Guide](../50-security/20-access-controls/index.md). |

Reviewer: "Claim name as suffix" does not correctly describe possible values. It actually describes the _key_. Perhaps this should be "A claim value"

## Labels

> | Key | Target Resource(s) | Possible Values | Description |

Reviewer: Let's alphabetize the entries in the table by key.

|-----|--------------------|-----------------|-------------|
| `kargo.akuity.io/alias` | `Freight` | Any string that is unique within the project | Mutable, human-readable alias for a piece of `Freight`. This label is automatically synced from the resource's `alias` field. Users are discouraged from modifying the label directly.  The label exists primarily to enable querying for `Freight` by alias using `kubectl`. |
| `kargo.akuity.io/project` | `Namespace` | `"true"` | Indicates that the `Namespace` is eligible for adoption by a `Project` with the same name. This label is useful when `Namespace`s are unavoidably pre-created by some other agent. For more details, see the [Working with Projects](../20-how-to-guides/20-working-with-projects.md#namespace-adoption) section. |
| `kargo.akuity.io/cred-type` | `Secret` | `git`, `helm`, `image`, `generic` | Indicates a `Secret` represents credentials for a repository of the specified type. For more details, see the [Managing Credentials](../50-security/30-managing-credentials.md#repository-credentials-as-secret-resources). |

> | `kargo.akuity.io/shard` | Internal resources | Shard ID | Label that indicates the logical cluster or controller shard ID. For `Warehouse` and `Stage` resources, users should set the `spec.shard` field to assign them to a specific shard. For `Promotions`, this label is automatically derived from the `Stage`'s `spec.shard` value. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `kargo.akuity.io/shard` | `Promotion`, `Stage`, `Warehouse` | Shard ID | Indicates a specific controller instance responsible for reconciling the resource. For `Warehouse` and `Stage` resources, this label is automatically synced from the resource's `spec.shard` field. Users are discouraged from modifying the label directly. The label exists primarily to enable querying for resources by shard using `kubectl`. |
```
